In [Part 1][] I regaled you with my first encounter with programming and the
bygone era of the early web computing days. Now, I'm going to explain why school
turned out very differently for me than the real world. This may seem like a
stupidly obvious realization to anyone who has already passed through the
gauntlet of our education system, but when you're still in the thick of things
it's not as clear. Looking back, I realize how under prepared I was and how much
I relied on sheer luck to get by. I was intent on getting a career in software
development, without a thought or consideration for any alternatives. I scored
pretty high in that area on my career placement exam, I had fun doing it at
home, and so, obviously, this must be the one and only career for me. My quest
was so blind that I also didn't even consider other schools. I had settled on a
university that seemed to be a good fit: [Kettering University][], and didn't
bother with any second or third choices.

Then I got a notice from my counselor about my GPA being less
than...desirable. So, I wrote a letter of apology in hopes they would accept my
application. Luckily, they did, and I was off to college to prepare for my
career! I was finally moving out on my own, on my way to learning how to write
real, professional software. The first few weeks were great. I was making
friends, taking difficult, but challenging classes like Calculus, Discrete
Mathematics, and Introduction to Java. I was really enjoying myself. Many late
nights were spent on homework assignments, trying to work out the algorithms
needed to get them working correctly. Of course, at this time, I also played an
excessive amount of [Final Fantasy XI Online][] which cut into my studies more
than I would admit at the time. Programming was hard, the compile, hack, compile
cycle was annoying. Calculus was also hard, along with many of my other
classes. Then came, what I consider to be, some pivotal moments that altered my
life course.

## Exhibit A ##

I was given a Java project in which we were told to write an encryption
algorithm that would take some text, encrypt it, and print it out. The second
part of the assignment was to reverse the encrypted text back into its original
form. Now, these days, I consider this to be a pretty trivial task, especially
with the wealth of encryption libraries available in pretty much any language of
your choosing. However, this assignment (at least as I remember it) did not
involve the use of any pre-existing libraries. We had to implement an encryption
algorithm from scratch. This was only my second semester in computer science,
and I **hated** this assignment. I never did complete it successfully. I was
able to encrypt text well enough but never succeeded in being able to decrypt
the content. **Strike 1 in my plans for a career in software development**.

## Exhibit B ##

The looming expenses of the upcoming academic year were starting to worry me. My
tuition for that first year came out to around $24,000 including room & board,
and I was barely able to afford it[^1]. The whole reason I had settled on
Kettering was because they offer a great co-op program. The idea was that you
would swap between school and co-op every three months. I had been looking for a
co-op position since the start of the school year and nothing had come up. The
few interviews I had had all required one critical skill that I failed to
satisfy: [Visual Basic][]. The chicken-and-egg conundrum was that Kettering did
not offer a course in Visual Basic (as far as I knew at the
time). Lovely. **Strike 2**.

## Exhibit C ##

A movie called [Office Space][] was released a few years before I started at
Kettering that cast a very negative (but humorous) light on the software
industry and on the mind-numbing conditions of working in cubicles. I absolutely
love that movie, but, quite honestly, I was terrified to actually get a job in
software if I was going to end up stuck for years on end in a cubicle patching
bank software. It just seemed so mindless, and so far my experience in school
was exactly that. It was far different than the fun I had had sitting in my room
at home, hacking away on something I got excited about. **Strike 3**.


It was because of this third strike that I began to consider transferring
schools because I was going to go bankrupt without a co-op. And, I thought, I
might as well change my major while I was at it since the whole computer science
thing wasn't really turning out to be my cup o' tea. My thought process was that
the reason I used to get so excited about programming was because the projects I
had worked on had a much more visible outcome. Graphics, web design, user
interactivity. The assignments I was being given in class were all back-end
algorithms, where most of the work was being done behind the scenes with no
visible output. Following that line of logic, I decided to switch my major to
Graphic Design. I switched schools too, to a local community college called
[Baker][] (much cheaper tuition!).

I had fun for a year before I realized how bored I was. I was really good at it,
but it just didn't have the same gratification as working out the solution to a
complex problem. I sought the advice of one of my graphic design teachers about
what I should do. Her recommendation was to try something more challenging,
naturally. I went home that evening and dug into the course curriculum offerings
that Baker had to find the major that would suit me. Web Design seemed to fit
the bill nicely. It had front-end components with a visual output, it also
involved back-end programming that would challenge me. I thought I was all set!

Sadly, it was not to be. Only a year into the program, Baker canceled their Web
Design degree. Thinking about it now, that seems kind of crazy and extreme. It's
possible that I misunderstood what that cancellation was truly about, but
nevertheless, I ended up switching schools and majors yet again. It was the
proverbial *last straw* on my camel's back.

Now, let's fast-forward through four years of changing schools and majors,
getting married, and moving from Michigan to California. I managed to land in an
IT related field working as a support technician for a company that sells
business phone systems as a service. This was a **fantastic** job. So much
better than anything I had before, and stable enough as a career choice for me
to forego finishing my degree. Over the course of a few years, I steadily rose
through the technical support ranks, earning experience and knowledge as I
went. It was around this time that my intense passion for programming began to
resurface. Out of necessity, the job required knowing a lot about our software
which was primarily written in [Perl][]. It was also a great boon to be able to
write or hack together quick support scripts to help with everyday, mundane,
tasks.

More and more, each day, I was spending increasing amounts of time and energy on
programming various things and getting excited like I used to back in those
early days. I was slowly planning my transition to move over to the engineering
side of our company. There were so many good ideas I had that would solve
problems we were dealing with in support. I wanted to be the one to solve those
problems through software. Of course, my wishes were eventually granted and I
was able to change positions.

When I finally found time to reflect on my history with software development, I
realized that being taught how to program is not the same as discovering how to
program. This, I think, more than any other is why software in school is so
different than software in a professional environment. In school, I was being
told about problems that needed solving and was told to solve them. The problems
were not *my* problems and thus were not important. It wasn't until I started
encountering problems that were important to me, that programming solutions to
them also became both important and interesting enough to invest my time in. It
was in the thick of that problem solving that I discovered how to program. Very
fluidly and organically.

The best advice I can give to anyone wanting to get into software development is
to go find a problem that you're passionate about solving and go solve it. The
joy of writing words into a computer that solves a problem is amazing and well
worth the effort. In [Part 3][], I'll delve into what my first experiences were
like in engineering and the kinds of challenges that came up that I didn't
expect going in.


<small>photo credit: [GYLo][] via [photopin][] [cc][]</small>

[^1]: Read: I took out a ton of loan money to pay for it.

[Part 1]: /lost-and-found-part-1 "\"Lost and Found\" : Part 1 - From Dungeons & Dragons to HTML"
[Kettering University]: http://www.kettering.edu/ "Kettering University"
[Final Fantasy XI Online]: http://www.playonline.com/ff11us/index.shtml "Final Fantasy XI"
[Visual Basic]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_Basic "Visual Basic"
[Office Space]: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0151804/ "Office Space"
[Baker]: http://www.baker.edu/ "Baker College"
[Perl]: http://www.perl.org/ "Perl"
[Part 3]: /lost-and-found-part-3 "\"Lost and Found\" : Part 3 - I do not think it means what you think it means"

[GYLo]: https://www.flickr.com/photos/gylo/273523592/
[photopin]: http://photopin.com
[cc]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/
